>> Kyle Simpson: I know when I
bring up that word recursion,
it sends shudders through the spine of
many of you because you're thinking,
it's so difficult and so complicated.
And I want to assuage those fears,
I want to allay those fears and
tell you that recursion is not as
complicated as is often made out to be.
I remember distinctly when I was back in
school, who knows how many years ago.
I remember feeling frustrated and
confused by this topic.
But I think it's more related to
our lack of proper perspective on
the topic than the fact that it is
just inherently hard to understand.
And as a functional programmer,
as somebody who aspires to use functional
techniques, your toolbox would be
incomplete if you were to say no,
I'm just not ever gonna use recursion.
It is a significantly important tool.
So we should spend a significant amount
of time making sure that we can get
comfortable with this topic.
Let's take this example of wanting to
count the number of vowels in a string.
I've got the quick brown fox
jumps over the lazy dog.
That's a weird thing from the days of
typewriters because that's a sentence that
has all of the letters in the alphabet in
it and that's why that sentence exists.
But it was just the first thing
that came up on a Google search.
So there you go.
There's a sentence and we want to count
how many vowels exist in that sentence.
And you can imagine very straightforwardly
an iterative approach which
is what I'm doing on lines 5 through 13.
I'm setting up a counter,
I'm doing a loop over that and
I'm checking to see if it's one of
those five letters that is a vowel.
And if so incrementing my counter and
then returning the number and
indeed the answer is 11.
>> Kyle Simpson: The problem with
this looping approach is that
the looping approach is basically telling
us you have to read the code to
convince yourself of what it does.
You cannot simply glance at any given for
loop somewhere and
absolutely know what that for
loop is gonna do.
You have to read it and execute it, to the
extent that it's written pretty simply,
it doesn't take a lot of
mental processing power.
But you cannot glance at this and
immediately know what it's doing.
So this is one of those
situations where we might ask,
is there some more declarative approach?
And there are multiple ways
to solve this problem.
I am not suggesting that recursion
is the only way to do so.
But recursion is going to be
a significant solution or
an important solution that we
should get more comfortable with.
Because there will be some problems
where recursion is much more of
the best answer to the problem.
And in fact, some cases, almost the only
practical answer to the problem at hand.
So some problems can be
solved with recursion and
some problems really must
be solved with recursion.
And because that is the case, it should be
a tool that we are at least familiar with.
The question you have to ask yourself is
what would be a recursive definition for
any problem.
You have to understand
a recursive definition for
a solution before you can start
writing a recursive function for it.
I know this is a shock,
but as a programmer,
your job is not to get the code to work.
Your job is to actually first
understand the problem.
And so the real question here is,
if my problem that I need,
or the algorithm that I want to design,
the solution that I want to provide,
is how many vowels are in a string?
I have to ask myself how would I define
that in a recursive way before I could
ever start writing a recursive function.
And there are in fact often multiple
ways to recursively define a problem.
Some problems, basically there's only one.
Some problems there's two or three.
So I'm not suggesting this is
the only way to approach to it but
I think it might be one of the most
natural ways to approach it.
And it goes under the general heading
of reducing the problem set, okay?
So I have an undetermined
number of characters,
I don't know how many
characters are in that string.
I have an undetermined
number of characters.
And, in fact, if I'm trying to create
a utility for this, it needs to handle
any string length from zero all the way
up to infinite string length, right?
So I don't know how many characters
I might have to look at.
But what I can say is that it would be
better if I solved a smaller problem.
Whatever the string length is,
if I was looking at one fewer
character in that string,
that would be an easier problem to solve
than my current length by one character.
And if I can think of it as
reducing it by one character,
then I can think about doing that again,
and now I've reduced by another character.
And doing that again, and now I've
reduced by another character, and so on.
And so we can,
from that way of thinking, by saying,
I want to reduce my problem set to
something that is easier to solve.
From that way of thinking we can say
the number of vowels in this string can
be defined as the number of
vowels in the first character,
plus the number of vowels
in the rest of the string.
Now, number of vowels in the first
character sounds like a silly
question to ask, but
it's basically just a binary choice.
Is it a vowel or not?
So it's a zero or one sort of question.
And whatever that number is, plus however
many vowels are left in the string.
And then, I could repeat that process by
saying, I've got a smaller string, and
I could say,
how many vowels are in that one?
As a matter of fact, I could do that exact
thing that I just described iteratively.
You could set up a for loop that looked
at the first character, said if it was
a vowel or not, added zero or one to the
count, and then reduced the string size.
As a matter of fact, that's sort of
what we're doing with the index here.
We're sort of indexing through the string
rather than trimming the string down.
But we're saying, how many vowels are here
plus how many vowels do I need to
count in the rest of the string?
That's the recursive, or a recursive
way of thinking about the problem.
So let's try to set out to
design a recursive function
that solves this problem.
Every single recursive solution is going
to have at a minimum, a base condition.
The base condition is how
you know when to stop.
It's just like in a for loop where you
have a test condition that tells the for
loop to stop, so
you don't get an infinite loop.
In our case, the base condition most
naturally is I have an empty string.
Because if I have an empty string,
I can definitely tell you there
are zero vowels in the empty string.
So that's what I'm checking on line 2.
I'm saying, if string.length = 0,
just return 0.
That is a base condition.
And then I need to ask,
what do I do if it's not 0?
Well, I need to count, whether or
not the current, character is a vowel,
and then I need to count, all the vowels
In the rest of the string, you with me?
So how do we do that?
First we, line 3 create first and
we set it to 1 or 0.
If string sub 0 is a vowel we set it to 1,
otherwise we set it to 0.
And then line 4,
we take whatever that value was and
we add it to the count of the vowels
in the rest of the string.
String.slice with 1 says slice
off the first character and
give me the substring that's left.
So make it a smaller problem,
smaller and smaller and smaller problem.
So if we started out with
a string that was 100 characters,
the next time we called it we'd be at 99.
And then at 98, and at 97, and all the way
down until we got to a string length of 0,
in which case we'd get 0.
Now we'd have all those stacked up ones
and zeros, ones and zeros, ones and
zeros and they're all in a big giant,
basically addition string.
0 plus 0 plus 1 plus 1 plus
1 plus 1 plus 0 plus 0, and
we just need to compute all of that.
And that's what the return
statements are gonna do, and
they're gonna give us back the number,
in this case, the number 11.
>> Kyle Simpson: Now here's why I think
recursion gets confusing for people.
I think recursion gets confusing for
people because they force themselves to
try to think about the implementation
of what's happening with recursion.
The same way they think about
the implementation when they write
the for loop.
And this is where we get off
track because recursion is
not designed to be an imperative approach.
It's designed, it's conceived
to be a declarative approach.
Remember, declarative says I'm not
concerned with how it happens,
I'm concerned with the outcome.
So if I can say in my mind that I
understand the idea that you could
count all of the strings,
all of the vowels to the right of me.
I don't know how you're gonna do it, but
I understand that you could
theoretically do that.
And I can understand
the problem of whether or
not this single character is a vowel.
And I can understand the idea that those
two things add together to give me
a total count.
Then I do not need to concern myself with
how that other sub problem gets solved.
>> Kyle Simpson: You can, if you want to
be a computer scientist, start drawing
all these diagrams of the stack frames and
the function call and what the values are.
But I think that's where
people get off track.
It's not that I don't want you
to understand that stuff, but
that's really deeper like, [LAUGH].
That's like computer science level
kinds of stuff where you need to track
all the memory frames and all that stuff.
What I want you to think about
as a functional programmer,
is can I break this problem into some
pieces that are easy to understand?
I understand that character one is either
a vowel or not, and I understand that
there is some way to compute how many
vowels are left in the other string.
And I'm gonna add those two together,
and give you your result.
And that's as far as we really should
have to go in terms of conceiving and
authoring our recursive algorithms.
If you find yourself having
to go deeper than that,
then recursion might not be
the solution that is best for you.
>> Kyle Simpson: Hopefully, that idea
will resolve some of the frustration that
you may have built up in the past about
recursion being confusing to author,
confusing to understand.
And the point that I wanna make here is
that even though there is some degree of
imperativeness in this code,
this code is much less imperative than
the iterative equivalent
on the previous screen.
If you get to the point where you start to
understand the patterns that happened with
recursion, and
there are a couple of major patterns
that almost all recursion fits into.
One of them is solve the sub problems.
That's the one I just talked about,
do something and reduce my problem,
set it to a sub problem and keep reducing.
Another one's called divide and conquer,
which takes a giant problem set and
says, can I eliminate half of the problem?
And then could I eliminate
another half of the problem, and
another half of the problem,
that's another pattern for it.
If you can get to the point where
you understand those patterns,
then you will start to be able to see
a recursive problem like this and
say I know exactly how they're solving it.
They're solving it with
the iterative sub-problem,
they're solving it with divide and
conquer, etc., okay?
There's a tremendous amount of math behind
that and none of that math even matters.
All that matters is that we can
trust that that stuff works.
You don't have to be able to write
the inductive proof for this thing.
You just have to be able to
intuit that I understand that
this part of the problem
could be solved and
this part of the problem I can
concretely solve, and now I'm done.